.TH MXCTL 1 "2026-07-13" "mxctl 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mxctl \- manage MXroute email accounts, forwarders, and catch-all policies
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mxctl
.RI [ options ]
.I group
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mxctl
is a small command line tool for managing MXroute email hosting:
mailbox addresses, forwarding rules, and catch-all (wildcard) policies.
It talks to the MXroute REST API at https://api.mxroute.com.
.PP
Because MXroute accounts can hold multiple domains, the domain to operate on
is taken from the email address given on the command line.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-color " {" auto | always | never }
Control ANSI colors.
.B auto
(the default) enables them only when the output stream is a terminal and the
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable is not set.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-plain
Machine readable listing output: colors are disabled, no alignment padding is
added, and forwarding rules are printed as "source: dest1, dest2" instead of
using the arrow.
Prefer this when piping listings to other tools.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print a short note on stderr for successful operations.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-install\-completion
Install shell completion for the current shell (bash, zsh, fish, or
PowerShell).
.TP
.B \-\-show\-completion
Print the completion script for the current shell, to copy it or customize
the installation.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Addresses (mailboxes)
.TP
.B mxctl address list \fR[\fIdomain\fR]
List addresses under the given domain, or under every domain of the account
when the domain is omitted.
.TP
.B mxctl address create \fIuser\fB@\fIdomain\fR
Create a mailbox.
Prompts twice for the password with hidden input.
Passwords must be at least 8 characters and contain an uppercase letter, a
lowercase letter, and a digit.
Accepts these options:
.RS
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quota " \fIMB\fR"
Storage quota in MB (0 means unlimited).
The server default is used when omitted.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " \fIN\fR"
Daily send limit.
The server default is used when omitted.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-password\-stdin
Read the password from the first line of stdin instead of prompting.
.RE
.TP
.B mxctl address delete \fIuser\fB@\fIdomain\fR
Delete a mailbox and all mail stored in it.
Asks for confirmation on the terminal; in scripts (no terminal) it refuses to
run unless
.B \-\-yes
is given.
.SS Forwarders
.TP
.B mxctl forward list \fR[\fIends-with\fR]
List forwarding rules across all domains of the account.
The optional argument keeps only rules whose source address ends with that
string.
.TP
.B mxctl forward create \fIuser\fB@\fIdomain\fR \fIdest\fB@\fIdomain\fR
Create a forwarding rule from source to destination.
The special destinations
.B :blackhole:
(silently discard) and
.B :fail:
(reject) are accepted in place of a destination address.
.TP
.B mxctl forward delete \fIuser\fB@\fIdomain\fR
Delete the entire rule for the given source address, including all of its
destinations, after confirmation (or with
.BR \-\-yes ).
.SS Catch-all (wildcard) policies
.TP
.B mxctl wildcard get \fR[\fIdomain\fR]
Print the catch-all policy for the domain, or for every domain of the account
when the domain is omitted.
The output is in exactly the form
.B set
accepts.
.TP
.B mxctl wildcard set \fIdomain\fR \fIpolicy\fR
Set the catch-all policy.
A policy is one of
.B fail
(reject mail to unknown addresses, the server default),
.B blackhole
(accept and silently discard it), or an email address (forward it there).
To clear a catch-all rule, set the policy to
.BR fail .
.SH CONFIGURATION
Credentials are read from
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/mxctl/config.toml
(default
.BR ~/.config/mxctl/config.toml ):
.PP
.nf
server = "eagle.mxlogin.com"   # your mail server
username = "johndoe"           # your DirectAdmin username
api_key = "Mx..."              # your API key
# api_url = "https://api.mxroute.com"   # optional override
.fi
.PP
API keys are created at https://panel.mxroute.com/api-keys.php.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Each config key can be overridden with an environment variable, which also
allows running without a config file.
.TP
.B MXCTL_SERVER
Overrides
.BR server .
.TP
.B MXCTL_USERNAME
Overrides
.BR username .
.TP
.B MXCTL_API_KEY
Overrides
.BR api_key .
.TP
.B MXCTL_API_URL
Overrides
.BR api_url .
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colors when set (with
.BR \-\-color=auto ).
.SH OUTPUT
Successful operations print nothing.
With
.BR \-\-verbose ,
a short note is printed to stderr.
Listings print one entry per line to stdout and nothing else, sorted
lexicographically while respecting the domain hierarchy.
Errors are printed to stderr as "mxctl: error: message".
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error: API error, invalid response, missing credentials, or a
declined confirmation.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: unknown command, bad flag, or malformed argument.
.SH EXAMPLES
List all addresses of a domain:
.PP
.nf
mxctl address list example.com
.fi
.PP
Create a mailbox with the password piped in:
.PP
.nf
printf '%s\\n' "$PASSWORD" | mxctl address create box@example.com \-\-password\-stdin
.fi
.PP
Forward one address to another:
.PP
.nf
mxctl forward create sales@example.com team@example.com
.fi
.PP
Forward all unknown addresses of a domain to a single mailbox:
.PP
.nf
mxctl wildcard set example.com all@example.com
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/mxctl/config.toml
Default configuration file.
.SH AUTHOR
Antonio de Haro (dc138) <antonio@adaro.eu>
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
See the LICENSE file in the source distribution.
